The Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor Affairs (DRL) is a bureau within the United States Department of State. The bureau is under the purview of the Under Secretary of State for Foreign Assistance, Humanitarian Affairs and Religious Freedom.


== History ==
The bureau was formerly known as the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, but was reorganized and renamed in 1994, to reflect both a broader sweep and a more focused approach to the interlocking issues of human rights, worker rights, and democracy.
From 2011 to 2015, DRL provided financial support to the Tor network (The Onion Router).
In 1982, the State Department asserted that "Where it has been possible to assign responsibility [for killings in Guatemala] it appears more likely that in the majority of cases the insurgents … have been guilty." However, US intelligence reports found the opposite.


== Functions ==
DRL's responsibilities include promoting democracy in U.S. and around the world, formulating U.S. human rights policies, and coordinating policy in human rights-related labor issues.  The Office to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism is a separate agency included in the Bureau.
The Bureau is responsible for producing annual reports on the countries of the world with regard to religious freedom through its Office of International Religious Freedom and human rights. It also administers the U.S. Human Rights and Democracy Fund (HRDF), which is DRL's flagship program.
Examples of DRL's human rights advocacy in foreign locations include China, the Middle East, and Russia.
In addition to its advocacy and reporting roles, the Bureau operates within the framework of U.S. foreign policy priorities and is subject to congressional oversight and public accountability.


== Organization ==
The head of the Bureau is the Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, currently Riley Barnes.
The Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor is divided into six offices.

Office of Natural Rights
Office of Reports and Sanctions – Prepares the State Department's annual Country Reports on Human Rights
Office of Free Markets and Fair Labor
Office of International Religious Freedom – Supports the United States Ambassador-at-Large for International Religious Freedom
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons
Office to Monitor and Combat Antisemitism


== References ==


== External links ==
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor official website
HumanRights.gov
Official page on Facebook
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor on AllGov.com