Yana Valerievna Lantratova (Russian: Яна Валерьевна Лантратова, born 14 December 1988) is a Russian politician and human rights activist serving as Russia's Commissioner for Human Rights since 14 May 2026.
Previously, she was a deputy of the 8th State Duma from 2021 to 2026. She headed the State Duma Committee on the Development of Civil Society from 2025 to 2026.
From 2015 to 2019, she served as executive secretary of the Presidential Council for Civil Society and Human Rights.


== Biography ==
Born on December 14, 1988 in Leningrad in the family of a soldier and a doctor.
In 2011, she graduated with honors from the Faculty of Journalism of St. Petersburg State University with a degree in «public relations». In 2012, she graduated from the Faculty of Law of the Northwestern Academy of Public Administration with a degree in «jurisprudence».
In 2019, she graduated from the Faculty of Psychology and Pedagogy of Moscow Pedagogical State University. 
In 2006, she became a member of the Russian Association of Students in Public Relations.
From 2006 to 2007, Lantratova worked on TV at MTV, Muz-TV, 5TV, the Five Songs program in St. Petersburg, a selection of extras for the Award, Muz-TV, work with youth associations.
Since 2006, she has been the founder and head of the Stars Center youth organization «Areas of activity», organizing charity events for show business stars in orphanages, hospitals, boarding schools, uniting and supporting talented youth, establishing contacts between youth and pop and film stars. The organization's branches were opened in more than fifty cities of the CIS countries.
Since December 2009 – Advertising and PR Manager Medical Center.
From 2009 work in the All-Russian public organization «Young Guard of United Russia» regional curator of the projects of the a public organization «Young Guard of United Russia» «I am a Volunteer» and «Accessible Environment» in Petersburg.
Since August 2010 – Coordinator of charitable projects of the public organization «Young Guard of United Russia.
In 2010, she started working as an assistant to the deputy of the Legislative Assembly of Saint Petersburg.
Since May 2010, she has been an Assistant to the Chairman of the  Committee of the Legislative Assembly of Petersburg.
In December 2010, at the Congress Guard, she was elected to the Federal Coordinating Council of the «Young Guard of United Russia» public organization and approved as the federal coordinator of the Guard's projects «I am a Volunteer», «Accessible Environment», «Child Protection», «Family for every Child in Russia». While working in the Young Guard, she organized volunteer groups in all regions of the Russian Federation and created a monitoring center for violations of children's rights, combating the spread of child pornography and pedophilia.
Since 2011, she has been a member of the Board of Trustees of Sanatorium Orphanage N 39.
On December 4, 2011, Yana Lantratova participated in the elections to the State Duma of the sixth convocation, but lost the election.
Since 2013 – chairman of the Coordinating Council of the All-Russian public organization «Union of Volunteers of Russia».
From November 2012 to December 2018, she was a Member of the Presidential Council for Civil Society and Human Rights. 
In 2016, she was one of three candidates proposed to the head of state for the post of Commissioner for Children's Rights in Russia.
In December 2018, she became a permanent expert of the Russian Human Rights Council.
From 2015 to 2019, she was appointed Executive Secretary of The Human Rights Council of the Russian Federation. 
In 2017-2019, she was an employee of the Presidential Administration of Russia Chief Adviser to the Department for Interaction with Institutions for the Protection of Citizens' Rights and the Development of Civil Society for Public Projects.
From 2019 to 2020 - Head of the Humanitarian Projects Department of the Integration Projects Development Department of the Ministry of Economic Development of the Russian Federation, from 2020 to 2021 - Deputy Director of the Department for the Development of Integration Projects and CIS Countries of the Ministry of Economic Development of Russia.
In May 2021, she joined the Just Russia party.
Since the fall of 2021, she has held the post of first deputy head of the Fair Russia faction, Sergei Mironov, in the State Duma.
From October 12, 2021 to February 26, 2025, she was the first deputy chairman of the State Duma Russia Committee on Education.
Since 19 September 2021 to 14 May 2026, she has served as deputy of the 8th State Duma Russia.
In 2025-2026 - Chairman of the State Duma Committee on the Development of Civil Society.


== Commissioner for Human Rights Russia ==
On May 14, 2026, the State Duma appointed Yana Lantratova Commissioner for Human Rights in the Russian Federation for five years. Lantratova took the oath of office as the Ombudsman.
In May 2026, after assuming the post she stated that, together with her colleagues, she had already prepared a work plan consisting of 63 initiatives. She called her tasks in her new position, to protect the rights of all people who apply to her, especially those who have fewer opportunities to do so on their own, such as the disabled and orphans, to monitor the provision of labor and housing rights, including when relocating from emergency homes, as well as the protection of the rights of orphaned children to receive housing, the situation special control
is under in places of forced detention.


== Results of activity ==


=== Experience in writing projects ===
July 2010 – first place in the competition of social projects of the youth camp «Caucasus 2020» for the project «Step into the future».
Author of the social project «Development of volunteerism in Russia» and the human rights project «Protection of Children».
Author of a number of social proposals for the National Program of the All-Russian Popular Front.
Member of the working group on the development of amendments to legislation aimed at strengthening the fight against crimes against children and the prevention of child neglect.


=== Main achievements ===
Creation of volunteer groups in all regions of the Russian Federation;
Implementation of a large number of social actions (1,300 volunteer events were held in 2011), systematic provision of targeted assistance to those in need, monitoring of accessibility issues for people with disabilities
Organizing and conducting lectures by volunteers on the legal education of children, orphans and children left without parental care
Creation of a monitoring center for the detection and suppression of crimes against children, the spread of child pornography and pedophilia
Prevention of dozens of cases of violations of the rights of socially vulnerable groups of the population – graduates of orphanages and boarding schools, orphans, victims of pedophilia, pensioners, large families;
The return of property rights to housing space to several graduates of correctional orphanages and neuropsychiatric boarding schools
Several children have found new families thanks to the Family for Every Child in Russia project
Collection of materials for initiating a number of criminal cases in cases of pedophilia and other crimes against childhood, systematic work with citizens' appeals.


== Awards ==
Awarded the Order of Friendship (2026).
He also holds the Order of Friendship of the Republic of South Ossetia (2023).


== References ==